CHAPTER 1
A Small Town


  Put thousands together
  Less bad,
  But the cage less gay.
    HOBBES

The small town of Verrieres may be regarded as one of the most
attractive in the Franche-Comte. Its white houses with their high
pitched roofs of red tiles are spread over the slope of a hill, the
slightest contours of which are indicated by clumps of sturdy
chestnuts. The Doubs runs some hundreds of feet below its
fortifications, built in times past by the Spaniards, and now in
ruins.

Verrieres is sheltered on the north by a high mountain, a spur of the
Jura.  The jagged peaks of the Verra put on a mantle of snow in the
first cold days of October. A torrent which comes tearing down from
the mountain passes through Verrieres before emptying its waters into
the Doubs, and supplies power to a great number of sawmills; this is
an extremely simple industry, and procures a certain degree of comfort
for the majority of the inhabitants, who are of the peasant rather
than of the burgess class. It is not, however, the sawmills that have
made this little town rich. It is to the manufacture of printed
calicoes, known as Mulhouse stuffs, that it owes the general
prosperity which, since the fall of Napoleon, has led to the refacing
of almost all the houses in Verrieres.

No sooner has one entered the town than one is startled by the din of
a noisy machine of terrifying aspect. A score of weighty hammers,
falling with a clang which makes the pavement tremble, are raised
aloft by a wheel which the water of the torrent sets in motion. Each
of these hammers turns out, daily, I cannot say how many thousands of
nails. A bevy of fresh, pretty girls subject to the blows of these
enormous hammers, the little scraps of iron which are rapidly
transformed into nails. This work, so rough to the outward eye, is one
of the industries that most astonish the traveller who ventures for
the first time among the mountains that divide France from
Switzerland. If, on entering Verrieres, the traveller inquires to whom
belongs that fine nail factory which deafens everybody who passes up
the main street, he will be told in a drawling accent: 'Eh! It belongs
to the Mayor.'

Provided the traveller halts for a few moments in this main street of
Verrieres, which runs from the bank of the Doubs nearly to the summit
of the hill, it is a hundred to one that he will see a tall man
appear, with a busy, important air.

At the sight of him every hat is quickly raised. His hair is turning
grey, and he is dressed in grey. He is a Companion of several Orders,
has a high forehead, an aquiline nose, and on the whole his face is
not wanting in a certain regularity: indeed, the first impression
formed of it may be that it combines with the dignity of a village
mayor that sort of charm which may still be found in a man of
forty-eight or fifty. But soon the visitor from Paris is annoyed by a
certain air of self-satisfaction and self-sufficiency mingled with a
suggestion of limitations and want of originality. One feels, finally,
that this man's talent is confined to securing the exact payment of
whatever is owed to him and to postponing payment till the last
possible moment when he is the debtor.

Such is the Mayor of Verrieres, M. de Renal. Crossing the street with
a solemn step, he enters the town hall and passes from the visitor's
sight.  But, a hundred yards higher up, if the visitor continues his
stroll, he will notice a house of quite imposing appearance, and,
through the gaps in an iron railing belonging to the house, some
splendid gardens. Beyond, there is a line of horizon formed by the
hills of Burgundy, which seem to have been created on purpose to
delight the eye. This view makes the visitor forget the pestilential
atmosphere of small financial interests which was beginning to stifle
him.

He is told that this house belongs to M. de Renal. It is to the
profits that he has made from his great nail factory that the Mayor of
Verrieres is indebted for this fine freestone house which he has just
finished building.  His family, they say, is Spanish, old, and was or
claims to have been established in the country long before Louis XIV
conquered it.

Since 1815 he has blushed at his connection with industry: 1815 made
him Mayor of Verrieres. The retaining walls that support the various
sections of this splendid garden, which, in a succession of terraces,
runs down to the Doubs, are also a reward of M. de Renal's ability as
a dealer in iron.

You must not for a moment expect to find in France those picturesque
gardens which enclose the manufacturing towns of Germany; Leipsic,
Frankfurt, Nuremberg, and the rest. In the Franche-Comte, the more
walls a man builds, the more he makes his property bristle with stones
piled one above another, the greater title he acquires to the respect
of his neighbours. M. de Renal's gardens, honeycombed with walls, are
still further admired because he bought, for their weight in gold,
certain minute scraps of ground which they cover. For instance that
sawmill whose curious position on the bank of the Doubs struck you as
you entered Verrieres, and on which you noticed the name _Sorel_,
inscribed in huge letters on a board which overtops the roof,
occupied, six years ago, the ground on which at this moment they are
building the wall of the fourth terrace of M. de Renal's gardens.

For all his pride, the Mayor was obliged to make many overtures to old
Sorel, a dour and obstinate peasant; he was obliged to pay him in fine
golden louis before he would consent to remove his mill elsewhere. As
for the _public_ lade which supplied power to the saw, M. de Renal,
thanks to the influence he wielded in Paris, obtained leave to divert
it. This favour was conferred upon him after the 182- elections.

He gave Sorel four acres in exchange for one, five hundred yards lower
down by the bank of the Doubs. And, albeit this site was a great deal
more advantageous for his trade in planks of firwood, Pere Sorel, as
they have begun to call him now that he is rich, contrived to screw
out of the impatience and _landowning mania_ which animated his
neighbour a sum of 6,000 francs.

It is true that this arrangement was adversely criticised by the local
wiseacres. On one occasion, it was a Sunday, four years later, M. de
Renal, as he walked home from church in his mayoral attire, saw at a
distance old Sorel, supported by his three sons, watching him with a
smile. That smile cast a destroying ray of light into the Mayor's
soul; ever since then he has been thinking that he might have brought
about the exchange at less cost to himself.

To win popular esteem at Verrieres, the essential thing is not to
adopt (while still building plenty of walls) any plan of construction
brought from Italy by those masons who in spring pass through the
gorges of the Jura on their way to Paris. Such an innovation would
earn the rash builder an undying reputation fot wrong-headedness, and
he would be lost forever among the sober and moderate folk who create
reputations in the Franche-Comte.

As a matter of fact, these sober folk wield there the most irritating
form of _despotism_; it is owing to that vile word that residence in
small towns is intolerable to anyone who has lived in that great
republic which we call Paris. The tyranny of public opinion (and what
an opinion!) is as fatuous in the small towns of France as it is in
the United States of America.
